COMMENTARY
Screening for NIDDM
Opportunities for detection, treatment, and
prevention
WILLIAM C. KNOWLER, MD, DRPH
Although non-insulin-dependent di-
abetes mellitus (NIDDM) is a com-
mon and serious disease, in the U.S.
about half of the people with this disease
are unaware of it. Approximately four
million Americans 20-74 years of age
have undiagnosed NIDDM (1), making
this disease  a candidate for early detection
and treatment (2).  I will present my views
on the principles of screening as applied
to NIDDM and on the benefits, costs,
methods, and unanswered questions re-
garding the screening and diagnosis of
this disease.
In NIDDM, the affected person,
whether diagnosed or not, does not re-
quire exogenous insulin to prevent keto-
acidosis and death (3,4). NIDDM may becaused by the known, but relatively un-common, genetic defects; but more com-
monly, the primary causes are still un-
known. NIDDM also includes some cases
of type
 1 diabetes caused by autoimmune
or infectious islet cell destruction that
have not yet progressed to insulin-depen-
dent diabetes mellitus (IDDM).
No universal agreement exists on
diagnostic criteria for NIDDM in men and
in nonpregnant women, and discrepan-
cies between criteria are even greater inpregnancy. All criteria in common use are
based on some measure of hyperglyce-
mia, but the distribution of fasting or
postload glucose concentrations in popu-
lations is continuous. Different groups of
investigators have arbitrarily divided the
continuum into several classes, which in-clude normal glucose tolerance, nondiag-nostic results (3), impaired glucose toler-
ance (IGT) (3,4), impaired fasting glucose
(5), and diabetes (3,4). I point out these
classification complexities to emphasize
that hyperglycemia is a continuum and
that the choice of cut-off points for defin-
ing diabetes is rather arbitrary.
Because of the serious conse-
quences of diabetes in pregnancy to the
mother and child, and evidence that treat-
ment of diabetes in pregnancy improves
the outcomes, all pregnant women
should be tested for diabetes. This topic,
including discussion of testing methods,
is well discussed elsewhere (3,4,6-9) and
will not be covered here.
Principles of screening
Screening is the use of a simple test to
discriminate between people who arelikely to have a disease and those who are
likely not to have it. By implication, a dif-
From the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Phoenix, Arizona.
Address correspondence to William
 C. Knowler,  MD,  DrPH, 1550 East Indian School Road,
Phoenix,  AZ 85014.
NIDDM, non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus;  IDDM,  insulin-dependent diabetes melli-
tus; IGT, imparied glucose tolerance; OGTT, oral glucose tolerance test; NDDG, National Dia-
betes Data Group; WHO, World Health Organization; ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme;
I:PG, fasting plasma glucose.ferent, definitive diagnostic procedure
confirms the presence or absence of the
disease. Screening can be conducted in
different settings, including testing people
seeking medical attention for other rea-
sons,  whether or not the disease is sus-
pected. Screening also includes programs
for testing people not seeking medical at-tention (e.g., the general population). A
screening test suitable for widespread use
should be simple, inexpensive, and cause
little discomfort or harm, whereas
 a defin-
itive test would be impractical for such
use. For example, testing for occult fecal
blood is a screening test for colon cancer,
whereas the definitive tests might include
much more invasive and expensive pro-cedures such as X-ray contrast studies,
colonoscopy, and biopsy.
Screening for NIDDM is different
in that several tests can be considered ei-
ther screening or diagnostic tests. The Na-tional Diabetes Data Group (NDDG) (3)
and the World Health Organization
(WHO) (4) published diagnostic criteria
based on the oral glucose tolerance test
(OGTT), but these criteria differ in some
important respects (10). The WHO andNDDG criteria have been widely adopted
in research, but they are not specific
about diagnostic levels of hyperglycemia
in the presence of symptoms or otherclinical indications of diabetes and, ap-propriately, do not recommend an OGTT
for the diagnosis of diabetes in these situ-
ations. For example, they recommend
that in the presence of symptoms (which
are impractical to define quantitatively)
the diagnosis can be made from fasting or
nonfasting blood or plasma glucose mea-
surements. Because measurement of glu-
cose is a simple, inexpensive, minimallyinvasive test that is applied widely inmedical practice, it can also be considereda screening test.
There is little question that diag-
nosing the cause of
 a patient's complaints
is beneficial, but it is uncertain whether
screening people who do not seek medi-
cal attention and may have no symptoms
from the disease is warranted. Extensive
DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 17, NUMBER 5, MAY 1994 445Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/17/5/445/515857/17-5-445.pdf by guest on 28 May 2023
Commentary
literature describes the requirements for a
worthwhile screening activity (11). I di-
vide these requirements into three parts:
the nature of the disease, the nature of the
available screening and diagnostic meth-
ods, and organizational needs.
Nature of the disease. For people who
are asymptomatic or not seeking medicalattention to benefit from diagnosis, 1) the
disease should be serious enough to war-
rant medical attention; 2) effective treat-
ment should be available; and 3) the
prognosis should be better if the disease isdiagnosed and treated early rather thanlate or never.
The availability of treatment en-
compasses not only the existence of ther-apeutic knowledge but also the socio-
economic resources needed to provide
the treatment. Sometimes these are devel-
oped in conjunction with, or
 as a result of,
screening programs. By prognosis, I in-clude not only therapeutic benefits but
also the costs and side effects of the treat-
ments and of
 the diagnostic labeling  itself.
NIDDM meets at least some of
these criteria. The disease is unquestion-
ably serious, and in developed countriestreatments are generally available.
Whether the prognosis is improved by
early diagnosis is discussed below.
Nature of the screening and diagnosticmethods. To justify use in people who
are not seeking medical attention for a
sign or symptom of the disease, thescreening and diagnostic methods shouldhave the following attributes: J) high ac-
curacy (i.e., sensitivity, specificity, andpredictive value); and 2) low cost, incon-venience, and discomfort relative to thebenefits of a diagnosis.
Ambiguity about accuracy of
screening tests for NIDDM results fromuncertainty in the diagnostic criteria
themselves. There is disagreement about
what tests (e.g., fasting glucose or OGTT)
and diagnostic levels should be used. Be-cause the screening and diagnostic meth-ods for NIDDM are interchangeable, in
my view, the question of accuracy ofscreening methods becomes primarily
one of choosing the best diagnostic test(see methods). Costs of most tests forNIDDM are relatively low. The disease
prevalence in the screened population is
 a
determinant of the cost per diagnosis; the
rarer the disease, the greater the cost.Organizational requirements forscreening. If screening for NIDDM oc-
curs in the course of medical care, theprovision of appropriate interpretation
and follow-up of the screening test results
should not be problematic. This issue
must be dealt with, however, if screeningis performed elsewhere (i.e., communityscreening). A system should be estab-
lished for inviting, testing, and notifyingsubjects, and most importantly, for fol-low-up evaluation and treatment whenindicated. Details of most of these points
are discussed elsewhere (11) and,
 specif-
ically regarding NIDDM, by the American
Diabetes Association's position statementon screening for diabetes (12).
Indications for screening and
diagnostic testing
According to these principles of screen-
ing, identifying previously undiagnosed
people with NIDDM is worthwhile, at
least in many settings. I will discuss these
situations in decreasing order of my as-
sessment of the potential benefit-to-cost
ratio.
Symptoms or signs that suggest diabe-
tes. There is little argument that people
with signs or symptoms that suggest dia-
betes warrant a diagnostic workup.
Other conditions associated with dia-
betes.  NIDDM is associated with many
other diseases or conditions, including
coronary artery disease, hypertension, re-
nal disease (microalbuminuria, protein-uria, and renal insufficiency), eye diseases
(retinopathy, cataract, and changing vi-
sual acuity), hyperlipidemia, peripheral
vascular disease, neuropathy, medial ar-
terial calcification, and periodontitis. Aclinician caring for a patient with one of
these conditions should consider diabetes
and in many cases test for it.
Presence of indicators of high risk of
NIDDM. People with first-degree rela-
tives with NIDDM, members of ethnicgroups with a high risk of NIDDM (e.g.,
American Indians, Pacific Islanders, His-
panic Americans), and obese and older
people are more likely to have NIDDM.
Thus,  a screening program for such peo-
ple will detect a higher proportion ofcases of NIDDM. This is favorable in
terms of the cost per diagnosis but does
not necessarily imply that such peoplewill derive more benefit from the diagno-
sis than those without such risk indica-
tors.
General population. The least certain
group for screening is the general popu-lation. Because many people with
NIDDM detected through such screening
have few signs or symptoms attributable
to diabetes, they may receive little imme-
diate benefit from a diagnosis and treat-
ment. The possibility of other benefits is
discussed in
 benefits.  The degree of hyper-
glycemia is likely to affect the benefit-to-
cost ratio. Those with a greater degree ofhyperglycemia probably have a worseprognosis, which may be improved byearly diagnosis and treatment, than those
whose degree of hyperglycemia barely
qualifies them for a diagnosis of NIDDM.
Benefits of screening and diagnosis
People with symptoms attributable to
diabetes. Because symptoms attributable
to hyperglycemia can usually be readily
relieved by hypoglycemic therapy, people
with symptomatic diabetes should benefit
from a diagnosis followed by appropriate
treatment. The diagnosis will often also
lead to recognition of other associated
conditions or chronic diseases for which
treatment may also be beneficial.People with diabetes and no or mini-
mal symptoms. The potential values of
diagnosis and treatment to control hy-
perglycemia and other factors, such as
hypertension and hyperlipidemia, are to
prevent 1) symptoms or acute complica-
tions;  and 2) the long-term vascular, re-
nal, and neural complications. This dis-
cussion of prevention of long-termcomplications also applies to people with
symptomatic diabetes.
The value of treatment to prevent
446 DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 17, NUMBER 5, MAY 1994Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/17/5/445/515857/17-5-445.pdf by guest on 28 May 2023
Knowler
symptoms and acute complications is ob-
vious,  but the prevention of long-term
complications is more controversial.
Among those with diabetes, the degree of
hyperglycemia, whether measured by
glycated hemoglobin or fasting or post-
load plasma glucose (13), is associated
with the risk of microvascular complica-
tions.  Two randomized clinical trials have
shown that in IDDM patients, intensive
insulin treatment improves glycemic con-
trol and decreases the incidence rates andrates of progression of several complica-
tions (14,15). Although these studies
were performed only in IDDM patients, I
believe, as do others (16), that they con-
firm the hypothesis that hyperglycemia
(or associated abnormalities that are in-
fluenced by insulin treatment) is causally
related to these complications. If
 so, then
lowering glycemia in NIDDM will also be
beneficial. The challenge in extrapolating
the results of studies in IDDM to NIDDM
is in choosing the best way to lower gly-cemia because more treatment options
are available, including sulfonylurea and
biguanide drugs and nonpharmacological
means. The optimal choice of hypoglyce-mic therapy in NIDDM is far from obvi-
ous because of a serious lack of relevant
clinical trial data. In a pioneering study of
this question, the University Group Dia-
betes Program did not provide strong ev-
idence that any form of treatment for
asymptomatic NIDDM prevented the
long-term complications (17). The U.K.
Prospective Study of Therapies of Maturi-
ty-Onset Diabetes (18), a multicentered
clinical trial of treatment of NIDDM cur-
rently in progress, will provide additional
data on this critical question.
High blood pressure predicts the
development of diabetic nephropathy in
NIDDM, and antihypertensive treatmentdecreases the rate of progression of renal
disease in NIDDM (19,20). The effect of atleast some antihypertensive drugs, such
as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors, may be independent of theireffect on lowering blood pressure (21,22)
and may in fact benefit people withNIDDM and normal blood pressure. Animportant question, which affects assess-
ment of the value of screening or early
diagnosis, is whether people withNIDDM of short duration, regardless of
blood pressure or albumin excretion rate,
should be treated with ACE inhibitors to
prevent or retard the development of ne-
phropathy and possibly cardiovascular
disease. I believe such a recommendation
cannot be made from existing evidence,
but clinical trials of this question are ex-
tremely important. Evidence favoring
such treatment would be, in my opinion,
the strongest argument yet for screening
for NIDDM, especially in populations in
which diabetic nephropathy is the most
serious and life-threatening complica-tion.
We need clinical trials not only of
treatment effects in NIDDM, but also of
screening
 itself,  to determine whether
treatments are more beneficial when
started early, as a result of screening, than
when initiated only after patients would
otherwise receive medical attention.
People with genetic susceptibility fac-
tors. The possibility of screening for peo-
ple with diabetes-susceptibility alleles at
genetic loci known to influence the risk of
NIDDM (23-27) is so new that little dis-
cussion has taken place about the thera-
peutic implications, let alone clinical tri-
als. As the ability to identify diabetes-
susceptibility genes increases, these
questions will become more pressing.
Some of the benefit-cost issues in detect-
ing susceptibility alleles in people with orwithout NIDDM are similar to those of
diagnosing NIDDM, but knowledge of agenetic mechanism may lead to better
therapeutic or preventive methods, and
the ability to screen early in life, at or be-fore birth, might drastically alter the ap-
proach to prevention.
General health benefits and the preven-tion of NIDDM. A diagnosis of NIDDM
will not provide optimal benefit unless it
is accompanied by a health assessment
during which other conditions that re-quire treatment may also be detected.
Many treatment approaches to NIDDM,
especially those emphasizing dietarymodification, exercise, and weight loss,
can be expected to improve not only thehyperglycemia of NIDDM but also associ-
ated conditions such as hypertension,hyperlipidemia, and atherosclerotic vas-
cular disease. The value of these interven-
tions does not necessarily depend on thepresence or diagnosis of NIDDM and
hence may not depend on screening for
NIDDM. Knowledge of the degree of hy-perglycemia (assessed by measuring glu-
cose or glycated hemoglobin) may, how-ever, be helpful as part of an overall health
assessment and influence the choice of
therapy.
Treatment of people with IGT or
other high-risk characteristics may pre-
vent or delay NIDDM (28-30). Besides
identifying people with undiagnosed
NIDDM, screening programs uncover
many with such high-risk characteristics,but no clear scientifically based treatment
has been found to offer these people. The
general health promotion measures dis-
cussed in the preceding paragraph should
be beneficial but how to use the data on
glycemia is unknown. My colleagues and
I have strongly advocated diabetes pre-
vention clinical trials in such people (29-
32). Fortunately, answers to some of
these basic clinical questions should be
obtained from the planned U.S. random-ized study Non-Insulin-Dependent Dia-
betes Primary Prevention Trial, in which
treatment of people with high-risk char-
acteristics such as IGT and those with
newly discovered NIDDM, but withoutsevere hyperglycemia, will be tested (33).
Adverse effects of screening and
diagnosis
As do all medical procedures, screening
and diagnostic tests for NIDDM have
costs:  economic, psycho-social, and med-
ical. I will discuss the latter two.
Although offering the hope of im-
proved prognosis through early treat-
ment, a new diagnosis of NIDDM is very
alarming and can transform an apparently
healthy person into one who is aware of
and frightened by having  a serious illness.
An NIDDM diagnosis may also affect
DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 17, NUMBER 5, MAY 1994 447Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/17/5/445/515857/17-5-445.pdf by guest on 28 May 2023
Commentary
one's ability to obtain insurance and em-
ployment. From a medical standpoint,
the diagnosis exposes a person to addi-
tional testing, follow-up, and treatment
that may be bothersome, unpleasant, or
even hazardous. The treatment may in-clude diet and exercise programs andsometimes drugs with potentially serious
or fatal side effects. Screening without ad-
equate follow-up has additional dangers.Because of the high variability of the tests,a normal person may be found to be ab-normal, a result that could lead to inap-
propriate diagnosis and treatment if notproperly followed up. Conversely, a per-son with NIDDM or at high risk of devel-
oping it could be falsely reassured by anormal screening test and thus delay
seeking needed
 care.  These adverse effects
are not sufficient reason to oppose screen-
ing for NIDDM, but they must be consid-
ered along with the potential benefits.
Methods of screening and diagnostic
testing
Testing for NIDDM in nonpregnant
people. The necessary test for NIDDM
depends on the diagnostic goal. If a pa-
tient has severe hyperglycemia, a clinical
suspicion of diabetes can be confirmed by
any of  a number of simple tests, including
fasting plasma, serum, or blood glucose;
glycated hemoglobin; or glycosuria by
dipstick or quantitative glucose measure-ment. Each test is very sensitive in detect-
ing NIDDM with severe hyperglycemia
(34).
Diabetes with less severe hyper-
glycemia  is more difficult to diagnose. The
simplest tests, such as glycosuria or non-
fasting blood glucose, are not well stan-
dardized because of variations in renalthreshold and effects of time of day and
last meal. To diagnose diabetes withoutsevere hyperglycemia, more standardized
tests,  such as fasting plasma glucose
(FPG) or OGTT, are needed. Even these
tests,  at the thresholds specified by the
WHO criteria for diabetes, detect differ-
ent conditions. The WHO FPG criterion
for diabetes (^7.8 mM or 140 mg/dl) re-
flects much greater hyperglycemia thanthe 2-h postload plasma glucose criterion
for diabetes (>  11.1  mM or 200  mg/dl).  In
the U.S. National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey, 89% of those meet-
ing the fasting glucose criterion also met
the 2-h criterion, but only 26% of those
with diabetes by WHO criteria had an
FPG level >7.8 mM (10).
No simple answer can be found to
the question of which test (fasting glucose
or OGTT) should be used for either a
screening or diagnostic test. Fasting glu-
cose by WHO criteria will diagnose fewer
people, but they will have more severe
hyperglycemia (except for those who didnot actually fast for the test). The differ-
ence,  however, is not between a fasting or
postload test, per se, but in the diagnosticlevels chosen for each one. Thus, the de-cision rests on the balance between bene-
fit and cost, which may depend on the
degree of hyperglycemia to be detected.
Both fasting and postload plasma
glucose measures are strongly related to
the presence or future development of the
microvascular complications of diabetes,
and, in populations with high prevalence
rates of NIDDM, both have bimodal fre-
quency distributions, which suggests a
natural division between diabetic and
nondiabetic people. Considerationshould not be restricted to these two mea-
sures,  however, because these same prop-
erties are shared by glycated hemoglobin.
Among Pima Indians, all three measures
(fasting glucose, 2-h glucose, and gly-
cated hemoglobin) are equivalent as pre-
dictors of diabetic retinopathy in those
with diabetes diagnosed by WHO criteria
(13) or in the entire population (35). We
have thus suggested that no particular ad-
vantage lies in the conventional diagnos-
tic methods based on fasting glucose orthe OGTT, and when it is more conve-
nient, diagnosis could also be made by
glycated hemoglobin (35). This test hasthe advantage, both in large-scale screen-ing programs and in routine clinical prac-
tice, of not requiring the subject to fast or
to spend 2 hours being tested. The disad-
vantages of glycated hemoglobin as a di-
agnostic test are that the methods arepoorly standardized and less outcomedata are available than for the OGTT. In
many settings, the laboratory, personnel,
and logistic costs incurred in measuring
glycated hemoglobin are less than thoseof obtaining fasting blood or performingan OGTT. In these settings, the glycated
hemoglobin test is, in my opinion, thepreferred screening and diagnostic test
for NIDDM.
Testing for people with high-risk con-
ditions such as IGT. Given the impreci-
sion of the tests and the uncertainties
about the appropriate diagnostic levels, a
fuzzy boundary exists between diabetesand high-risk conditions such as IGT.During the process of screening and diag-
nosing NIDDM, regardless of the method
and diagnostic levels used, many people
will be found whose test results are justbelow the diagnostic level and who are at
increased risk of developing diabetes in
the future (or of being diagnosed if retest-
ed). In people without diabetes, many
factors, such as IGT, obesity, fasting hy-
perinsulinemia, and others listed in Indi-
cations,  predict its development or indi-
cate a greater likelihood of undiagnosed
diabetes. In addition, it has recently be-
come possible to identify some people ge-
netically at high risk of NIDDM by virtue
of carrying abnormal alleles at the glu-cokinase, insulin, or other genetic loci
(23-27).  I predict that the ability to iden-
tify people with genetic susceptibility to
NIDDM will increase greatly in the next
few years.  Certain HLA-DR and -DQ (hu-
man leukocyte antigen) types and anti-bodies to islet cells and GAD (glutamic
acid decarboxylase) also indicate higherrisk of diabetes that is primarily IDDM,
but may include some people with or at
high risk for developing NIDDM.
Conclusions and recommendations
NIDDM is a common disease that is often
disabling or fatal, but approximately half
of the adults with the disease are undiag-
nosed. NIDDM, which is easily detectedin routine medical practice or populationscreening programs, is thus an obvious
448 DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 17, NUMBER 5, MAY 1994Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/17/5/445/515857/17-5-445.pdf by guest on 28 May 2023
Knowler
candidate for increased efforts for screen-
ing and diagnosis.
The major controversy centers
around which people will benefit from
discovering the undiagnosed disease. A
broad spectrum of people can be found,
ranging from pregnant diabetic women
and others with symptoms of diabetes, for
whom diagnosis and treatment are clearlyindicated, to asymptomatic people who
have IGT or barely satisfy diagnostic cri-
teria for diabetes, for whom the benefits
of treatment or the optimal form of treat-
ment are unknown. For these people, aswell as those with other high-risk condi-
tions (including genetic susceptibility),
we need guidance from clinical trials.There is great hope that early interven-
tions,  such as treatment of  IGT to prevent
NIDDM or treatment of new-onset
NIDDM with ACE inhibitors to prevent
nephropathy, may be very beneficial in
the long run, but we do not yet have suf-ficient evidence to recommend these
measures except in the context of re-
search studies.
1 believe screening and diagnostic
procedures are clearly indicated for preg-nant women and people with symptoms
or signs suspected of being caused by di-
abetes and for those with diseases often
associated with diabetes for whom diag-
nosis and treatment of diabetes wouldhelp in their management. If screening is
performed in other situations without a
research component, relatively stringentdiagnostic criteria should be employed to
increase the probability that people de-
tected will benefit from treatment.
There is insufficient evidence that
widespread population screening forNIDDM is beneficial, but there seems to
be
 a high probability that such benefit will
be demonstrated by appropriate research
studies, which need to be encouraged.
Such research should also evaluate
screening and diagnostic methods other
than fasting glucose and the OGTT. Gly-
cated hemoglobin appears to have the
same desirable properties for a screeningor diagnostic test plus many practical ad-
vantages.Population screening programs
for diabetes should usually be combined
with screening for other treatable chronic
diseases or risk factors. This is especiallytrue in populations with a low prevalenceof NIDDM, in which the value of screen-
ing for other conditions may be greater
than for NIDDM. General recommenda-
tions regarding screening for diabetes-
susceptibility genes are premature, but
discussion of these topics will soon be-
come much more important.
Screening and diagnosis are only
the beginning of
 a process of helping peo-
ple with undiagnosed NIDDM. Equally
important are determining the optimal
treatments for people with differing de-
grees of abnormality or with different
causes of NIDDM and ensuring that when
effective treatments are known, they are
made available.
Acknowledgments— I am indebted to the
members of the Gila River Indian Community
of Arizona for teaching me about NIDDM and
the people affected by it. I thank  Drs.  Robert L.
Hanson, Venkat Narayan, Robert G. Nelson,
David J. Pettitt, and Peter  H. Bennett for advice
on this paper.
References
1. Harris MI, Hadden WC, Knowler WC,
Bennett PH: Prevalence of diabetes and
impaired glucose tolerance and plasmaglucose levels in the
 U.S.  population aged
20-74 years.  Diabetes  36:523-534, 1987
2. Bennett PH, Knowler  WC:  Early detection
and intervention in diabetes mellitus: is iteffective?J
 Chron Dis  37:653-666, 1984
3. National Diabetes Data Group: Classifica-
tion and diagnosis of diabetes mellitus
and other categories of glucose intoler-
ance.  Diabetes  28:1039-1057, 1979
4. World Health Organization:  Diabetes  Mel-
litus: Report of a WHO Study Group. Ge-
neva, World Health Org., 1985 (Tech.
Rep. Ser., no. 727)
5. Charles MA, Fontbonne A, Thibult N,
Warnet J-M, Rosselin GE, Eschwege E:
Risk factors for NIDDM in white popula-tion: Paris Prospective Study.
 Diabetes  40:796-799, 1991
6. Proceedings of the Second International
Workshop-Conference on Gestational
Diabetes Mellitus.  Diabetes  34 (Suppl. 2):
1-126,  1985
7. Proceedings of the Third International
Workshop-Conference on Gestational
Diabetes Mellitus.  Diabetes  40 (Suppl. 2):
1-201, 1991
8. Pettitt DJ, Baird HR, Aleck KA, Bennett
PH, Knowler WC: Excessive obesity in
offspring of Pima Indian women with di-
abetes during pregnancy. New  EnglJ Med
308:242-245, 1983
9. Pettitt DJ, Aleck KA, Baird HR, Carraher
MJ, Bennett  PH, Knowler  WC:  Congenital
susceptibility to non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus: role of intrauterine en-
vironment.  Diabetes  37:622-628, 1988
10. Harris MI, Hadden WC, Knowler WC,
Bennett PH: International criteria for thediagnosis of diabetes and impaired glu-
cose tolerance.
 Diabetes Care  8:562-567,
1985
11. Burr  ML, Elwood  PC: Research and devel-
opment of health promotion services—
screening. In Oxford Textbook of  Public
Health: Investigative Methods in PublicHealth. Vol. 3. Holland WH, Detels R,
Knox G, Breeze E, Eds. Oxford, Oxford
University Press, 1985, p. 373-384
12. American Diabetes Association: Screen-
ing for diabetes.  Diabetes  Care 12:588-
590, 1989
13. Liu QZ, Pettitt DJ, Hanson RL, Charles
MA, Klein R, Bennett PH, Knowler WC:
Glycated haemoglobin, plasma glucose
and diabetic retinopathy: cross-sectional
and prospective analyses.  Diabetologia  36:
428-432, 1993
14. Reichard P, Nilsson B-Y, Rosenqvist U:
The effect of long-term intensified insulin
treatment on the development of micro-
vascular complications of diabetes melli-
tus. New  EnglJ Med  329:304-209, 1993
15. The Diabetes Control and Complications
Trial Research  Group:  The effect of intensive
treatment of diabetes on the development
and progression of long-term complications
in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
New EnglJ Med  329:977-986,1993
16. American Diabetes Association: Implica-
tions of  the Diabetes Control and Compli-
cations Trial. Diabetes Care 16:1517-
DlABETES CARE, VOLUME 17, NUMBER 5, MAY 1994 449Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/17/5/445/515857/17-5-445.pdf by guest on 28 May 2023
Commentary
1520,1993
17. University Group Diabetes Program: Ef-
fects of hypoglycemic agents on vascular
complications in patients with adult-
onset diabetes. VIII. Evaluation of insulintherapy: final report.
 Diabetes  31 (Suppl.
5):1-81,  1982
18. U.K. Prospective Study of Therapies of
Maturity-Onset Diabetes. I: Effect of diet,
sulphonylurea, insulin, or biguanide
therapy on fasting plasma glucose and
body weight over one year.  Diabetologia
24:404-411,  1983
19. Arky RA, Caro JF, Johnson C, Knowler
WC, McManus K, Moore MA, Sheps SG,
Simonson DC, Spratt I: Treatment of hy-
pertension in diabetes.  Diabetes  Care 16:
1394-1401,  1993
20. Ravid M, Savin  H, Jutrin I, Bental T, Katz
B, Lishner  M: Long- term stabilizing effect
of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibi-tion on plasma creatinine and on protein-
uria in normotensive type II diabetic pa-
tients.  Ann Intern Ued 118:577-581,
1993
21. Kasiske BL, Kalil RSN, Ma JZ, Liao M,
Keane WF: Effect of antihypertensivetherapy on the kidney in patients with di-
abetes:
 a meta-regression  analysis.  Ann In-
tern Ued 118:129-138, 1993
22. Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Bain RP, Rohde
RD, the Collaborative Study Group: The
effect of angiotensin-converting-enzymeinhibition on diabetic nephropathy. New
Engl]
 Med  329:1456-1462, 1993
23. Taylor SI, Cama A, Accili D, Barbetti F,Imano E, Kadowaki H, Kadowaki T: Ge-
netic basis of endocrine disease. I. Molec-
ular genetics of insulin resistant diabetes
mellitus. ] Gin  Endocrinol Metab  73:1158-
1163,1991
24. Vionnet N, Stoffel M, Takeda  J, Yasuda K,
Bell GI, Zouali H, Lesage S, Velho G, Iris
F, Passa Ph, Froguel Ph, Cohen D: Non-
sense mutation in the glucokinase gene
causes early-onset non-insulin-depen-
dent diabetes mellitus. Nature  356:721-
722,1992
25. Hattersley AT, Turner RC, Permutt MA,
Patel P, Tanizawa Y, Chiu KC, O'Rahilly
S, Watkins PJ, Wainscoat  JS: Linkage of
type 2 diabetes to the glucokinase gene.
Lancet  339:1307-1310, 1992
26. Bell GI, Xiang K-S, Newman MV, Wu
S-H, Wright LG, Fajans SS, Spielman RS,
Cox NJ: Gene for non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus (maturity-onset diabe-tes of the young subtype) is linked to
DNA polymorphism on human chromo-
some 20q. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:
1484-1488, 1991
27. Bowden DW, Akots G, Rothschild CB,
Falls KF, Sheehy MJ, Hayward C, Mackie
A, Baird J, Brock D, Antonarakis SE, Fa-
jans SS: Linkage analysis of maturity-
onset diabetes of the young (MODY): ge-
netic heterogeneity and nonpenetrance.
Am] Hum  Genet  50:607-618, 1992
28. Eriksson K-F, Lindgarde F: Prevention of
type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetesmellitus by diet and physical exercise: the6-year  Malmo feasibility study.  Diabetolo-
&a 34:891-898, 1991
29. Tuomilehto J, Knowler WC, Zimmet P:
Primary prevention of non- insulin-de-
pendent diabetes mellitus.  Diabetes Metab
Rev 8:339-353, 1992
30. Knowler WC, McCance DR, Nagi DK,
Pettitt DJ: Epidemiologic studies of the
causes of non-insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus. In Causes of Diabetes. LeslieRDG, Ed. Sussex, England, Wiley, 1993,
p.187-218
31. Knowler WC, Pettitt DJ, Saad MF, Ben-
nett PH: Diabetes mellitus in the Pima In-
dians:  incidence, risk factors, and patho-
genesis,  Diabetes Metab  Rev 6:1-27,1990
32. Knowler WC, Saad MF, Pettitt DJ, Nelson
RG, Bennett  PH: Determinants of diabetes
mellitus in the Pima Indians. Diabetes
Care 16:216-227, 1993
33. National Institutes of Health:  Non-lnsulin-
Dependent Diabetes Primary Prevention
Trial. NIH Guide. Vol 22, no. 18. Be-
thesda, Maryland, NIH, 1993
34. Hanson RL, Nelson RG, McCance DR,
Beart  JA, Charles MA, Pettitt DJ, Knowler
WC: Comparison of screening tests for
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
Arch  Intern  Med 153:2133-2140, 1993
35. McCance DR, Hanson RL, Charles MA,
Jacobsson LTH, Pettitt DJ, Bennett PH,
Knowler WC: Should diagnostic criteria
for diabetes be revised? A comparison of
glycated haemoglobin, fasting, and two-
hour plasma glucose and risk for micro-
vascular complications.  Br Med].  In press
450 DIABETES CARE, VOLUME 17, NUMBER 5, MAY 1994Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/17/5/445/515857/17-5-445.pdf by guest on 28 May 2023
